# Predicting-the-NHL-s-Hart-Trophy-Winner
TL;DR - Use data from 2004 to the current 2018 season to predict the NHL's Hart Trophy winner using linear and logistic regression in python. 

Every year since 1924, the National Hockey League (NHL) has awarded the Hart Memorial Trophy to the player judged to be the most valuable to their team. This prestigious trophy has been awarded 92 times to only 56 players in the past nine decades. The criteria for winning this award is not well defined. It does not simply go to the player with the most points or goals or wins. In fact, defining what “most valuable to their team” means has been a debate among hockey enthusiasts for years. Controversy regarding the eventual Hart Trophy winner is common as the criteria is mostly subjective. The controversy is even more inflamed during years in which there is no clear runaway statistical favorite. 

The ultimate judges for the Hart Trophy, and thus the league MVP, are the members of the Professional Hockey Writers’ Association. Each of these individuals have their own preferences, biases and criteria for judging players eligibility to claim the most valuable player award. Every year these journalist cast their vote for who they believe deserves the Hart Trophy. Sometimes the votes are so close that they are not even statistically significant. In 2002, two players tied in the final voting. A tiebreaker was cast in which the eventual MVP, Jose Theodore, won by just four votes. 

In hockey, points are awarded for goals and assists and are generally indicative of a player’s overall skills level. However, many things contribute to a player’s individual performance. Player age, position, team, right/left handedness, penalty minutes, time on ice, blocks, shot percentage, and many other variables could be potential predictors of individual success and thus Hart Trophy consideration. What if we could predict who the NHL’s most valuable player will be using historical data? The answer to this question would be profoundly interesting to hockey enthusiasts, gamblers, team general managers, and data scientists across the world.
Every player’s individual season stat line and their Hart award outcome was collected for use in this project. Both regular and advanced statistics (as defined by the hockey community) were collected to provide as many suitable variables as possible. Data was scraped and exported from NHL.com as well as hockey-reference.com. While the NHL website is considered the definitive source, hockey-reference provided much more detailed and historical Hart Trophy finalists data. This was added to the NHL data to create a more robust and complete dataset for analysis. The “HART” trophy features is a simple 0 or 1 for each player for each season with a 1 indicating they won the Hart that particular year. The “Votes” feature lists the total number of votes a player received in the Hart Trophy voting done by journalist.  

Data was captured from the 2004 to the current 2018 NHL season. The current 2018 season stats represent 28 games played thus far which is roughly 35% of a full season. The 2004 season was chosen as a starting point since it is generally accepted as the start of the modern NHL era after rule changes and a player lockout. These changes were sweeping and drastically changed the pace of the game. Scoring increased, penalties increased, and a new focus on speed emerged throughout the league. NHL experts consulted for this project agreed this was an appropriate starting. However, in retrospect many more years’ worth of player statistics and Hart Trophy results would’ve benefited this project immensely. Ultimately, the final data set was roughly two megabytes, with 31 features, and over 13,000 instances for unique 2,661 players.

Our first prediction will use linear regression and the number of Hart Trophy votes the response variable. This model will make use of the SK learn library to explore the relationship between features and the continuous response variable of Hart Trophy votes. All data from 2004-2016 will be split into our train portion and data from 2017 through the current 2018 season will be our test portion. A prior stepwise regression identified our most important variables as goals, assists, plus minus, point share, even strength goals, game winning goals, shot percentage and time on ice. 

The second predictive model made use of logistic regression with the binary “HART” variable serving as the response variable. As the name implies, logistic regression uses the logistic curve to fit the data and odds ratios to calculate the probability of a player winning the Hart MVP Trophy. This probability is then applied to each player as their “probability score”. Players with the highest probability score are those who are most likely to win the Hart award. As with linear regression, results from the already completed 2017 season will be examined in order to judge predictions versus actual results. Then predictions will be made for the ongoing 2018 season with the stats compiled by players thus far.

Linear and logistic regression have both produced very reliable predictions for the current NHL season. It is fascinating to see the similarities between both models’ outputs especially since the linear regression model used a continuous response variable and the logistic model used a binary response variable. A comparison of both models results can be found in the accompanying notebooks.

Consultations with industry experts and widely accepted betting odds indicate that these results are reasonable. It seems very likely that one of the above mentioned players will win the Hart Trophy. But there is still a lot of hockey left to play in this season and great players can go on hot streaks that defy most statistical predictions. The ultimate test of accuracy will come in June 2018 when the Professional Hockey Writers’ Association gather to cast their votes for the Hart Memorial Trophy to go to the player judged to be the most valuable to their team
